you
a question automatically arises who is
responsible and that is a bin for the
peace movement for the anti-war movement
as well a very difficult trying question
and the discovery of who is responsible
is in part a function of political
consciousness as an end is in part a
reflection of our own maturity through
the development of an understanding of
the nature of power and who controls
that power in our society one of the
contributors to an understanding of that
problem is the next speaker professor G
William vom Hoff from the University of
California at Santa Cruz author of the
text who rules America and author also
the less well-known book see right Nils
in the power elite professor Dom hovels
speak on the question of the foreign
policy establishment in these brief few
minutes I want to talk on how and why
the power leap makes foreign policy
since this presentation is very short it
will consist mostly of assertions that
is I will not be able to describe in
detail the methods by which I arrive at
the statements I make I will not present
all the evidence that I very easily
could present and I will not be able to
burden you with a great many supporting
footnotes and and references now I want
you to know that this is the most
uncomfortable situation for an academic
to be in because we like very much to
cover ourselves to be temperate
reasonable confusing and unconvincing
now
apologies aside I'll try to show that
the power elite make foreign policy in
this country and I will tell you exactly
how they do it and at the close I will
say a word or two about why they do what
they do which is very easy to know if
you know how they do it I define the
power elite is the operating arm of the
American upper class it is the group of
people that keeps too
of 1% of the american people owning 22%
of all american wealth that's privately
held and 65 to 70% of all corporate
wealth it also keeps this small group of
people enjoying the good things that
wealth can buy and command Jet Set
parties costing 75 to 100 thousand
dollars debutante balls costing a couple
hundred thousand dollars keeping horses
who eat enough and need enough care in a
year that takes more money than most
people make in a year
point is very simply and no radical
statement should ever begin without it
that the people that have wealth in this
country are very small the rest of us
have education expertise our reasonable
and sensible judgment and our good name
and we can last about three weeks
without our salary which explain is a
good deal why everybody keeps their
place in the system anybody that doesn't
as an individualist and martyr and
suffers from an overly developed
super-ego and if you understand Lenny
Bruce he said very simply if you want to
be a man in this system you sell out
anything less than that is a little
crazy if it's not part of a movement
morals aside not all members of this
privileged upper class this ruling class
are involved in ruling I talked to many
every day that don't have the slightest
idea how the system runs but the fact is
that some few very important members of
this class are involved in running the
system and they do so in conjunction
with carefully selected employees and
they are the ones that make the big
decisions they are the ones that had
this country in certain directions it is
not a function of their personality it
is not a function of LBJ's boorishness
it is not a function of Eisenhower's
stupidity or any little accidents along
the line these decisions are made by
moderate pragmatic smart given the
system men with the absolutely best
academic advice that can be bought I'm
not trying to say they're geniuses I'm
just trying to say that they're every
bit as smart as we are and they know
everything that we can figure out these
men have figured
and this is the difference then we'll
meet members of the ruling class that
don't know up from down but you'll also
are very very sophisticated about this
system I'm going to tell you how they
get sophisticated and I'm gonna do it
particularly terms of course of foreign
policy how do they do it on foreign
policy if they do it I'm always glad to
do this on the Berkeley campus because
the wonderful pluralists always chuckle
at me and say well how do they do it as
a big joke and have a big giggle and
poles be rights he doesn't tell us the
thing about how the system works this is
how it works on foreign policy poles B
doesn't know it so you can tell them in
class tomorrow now very simply what
happens on foreign policy is that they
meaning the power elite work through
certain intermediary organizations which
are financed by their corporations and
foundations and by foundations you
almost always mean Ford Rockefeller and
Carnegie most important of these
foundations are these or intermediary
organizations are essentially three
first the Council on Foreign Relations
second the committee for economic
development and third I like to mention
the Brookings Institution because my
present boss is a retired head of the
Brookings Institution I think he always
likes me to mention names Robert Calkins
and he's the head of the social sciences
at Santa Cruz now who are these groups
first of all very simply they are the
big rich the corporate leaders and their
academic advisors that is the personnel
of these groups what do they do very
simply they get together in various ways
and discuss how best to deal with their
problems now sometimes this involves
luncheon meetings in New York where
speakers are brought in where everybody
important it goes to New York always
goes by the Council on Foreign Relations
but most important this involves groups
discussion groups of 20 to 25 men these
groups get together discuss a question
Russia China nuclear policy who is who
is in these groups well they're led by
maybe four or five or six academics the
finest you can buy is to repeat and then
you'll find in the group various big
corporate leaders and they will discuss
a given
question one of my friends who served as
an informant for me as well as my more
academic understanding of this explained
a group from the early 50s he was in a
group on sort of the revolutionary
potential in Russia then this group was
J J McCloy of Chase Manhattan Ford and
many other pursuits dev'reaux josephs
of the morgan empire dean rusk who was
then just a petty sort and Averell
Harriman oh I was stunned when he told
me this because it's almost textbook in
terms of our paranoia's who was there
there were other there were other
businessmen there there's a
representative from State Department and
then whose representative from the CIA
robert amery Cleveland a Murray's not so
funny brother as as Cleveland is and
with the help of various people from
Columbia and Harvard and so on they
discussed what was a chances were for a
little change in Russia and the
conclusion of the group was much that
that the academic said there wasn't much
chance for the kind of change that the
Americans would like to see and and the
CIA concurred now that's where it
happens my buddy also wrote at that time
a little report saying it would be crazy
to hold an election in Vietnam he's a
good pluralistic I almost jumped out of
my chair and I grabbed him and I said
well did did Averell Harriman here
didn't flew here he said yeah they heard
it I said what did they say so what I
didn't say anything I just listened and
he did not I said do you think that's
how that word got to Ikes I don't know
anybody that would have studied at that
time would have known that you should
never hold such an election and so on so
this is a perfect case where I can
actually see policy generated and go
right on he's well I can't I don't
really know anything more about it
well you know we got pretty close that
time but you know everybody has a little
piece of the action a little piece of
the system
Kissinger ran one of these study groups
in the late 50s same sort of personnel
CIA State Department big corporate
leaders and they discuss nuclear weapons
and was a rather impressive sort of a
book that came out of it is this all a
conspiracy like dan smoot says it is dan
smoot taught me all this and I always
like to point that out because I have
learned more from dan smoot than any
political scientist in this country and
but the thing is that dan smoot thinks
it's all a secret conspiracy which is
sort of tragic because
learned about it in Harper's Magazine
and from their annual report the
important thing though is that these are
consensus seeking organizations it's in
these organizations that the leaders of
the ruling class the power elite meet
and discuss and and become sophisticated
their consensus seeking they're not
conspiratorial they'll send you their
annual report the academic community
will not study the committee for
economic development they have to hire
their own historian to brag they have
two books out now by Karl shrift geyser
he's the only one that studied them they
want to let everybody know that they
aren't like the NA em that they're
liberal their corporate liberals in new
left-turn but they have to brag about
themselves you can't get anybody to
study them I always like to use this
particular example because it gives us a
chance to discuss conspiracy because
that's a word that ties up with paranoid
which many political scientists learned
about in their introductory abnormal
psych course and everybody knows that
paranoid stacy plots and so on and so
forth it's a wonderful thing to pin on a
guy to call them a paranoid call them
conspiratorial and that's the end of of
the argument and it gives us a chance to
then deal with this because of course
it's not a conspiracy in that sense
these people do it in the open they'll
send you their their book the main thing
is that why you don't know about this
organization is that nobody cares the
american people most of them are getting
theirs as long as they're getting theirs
they're not going to look very hard the
second organization i'll just mention it
very quickly as a committee for economic
development formed about nineteen forty
two by people that were essentially
scared that there would be a post-war
depression again discussing with
carefully selected economists they
learned about the system seven to the
eight top people in the marshall plan
came directly from the committee for
economic development i have a favorite
story about the committee its concerns
the alliance for progress you could read
the whole chapter in lazing hers book on
a thousand days and you would think that
Schley zingers started the alliance for
progress but i happened upon the fact
that maybe ced was involved in this and
i wrote to him and they said you're darn
right we wrote a report that was very
similar to what's the alliance for
progress because some of the paying
people worked on our report that worked
on the kennedy report but she would
never know that from reading slaving her
you'd never know from reading raymond
bow
a nickel to solar pool in their book on
on American business and public policy
which is about lowering tariffs free
trade you would never know that they
were in a Council on Foreign Relations
study group which talked about this
whole thing you read their book and it's
just sort of a miracle that the business
community is suddenly no longer
isolationist you wouldn't know that the
committee for economic development
council on foreign relations have been
pushing this whole change for thirty
years where do these people get their
academic expertise where do they get so
clever about the system well they first
of all get them from scholars at certain
Institute's first of all I would say at
Harvard MIT Colombian Princeton and a
few strays in the hinterland such as at
Berkeley and that was spelled out in
pretty good detail this morning in in
cinah and it's in a pamphlet that
radical students are whatever gonna make
up point is that's a very nice case
example of what happens and where these
academics these certain academics are
our house they then go and perform for
the Council on Foreign Relations or or
for the committee for economic
development or for sundry other groups
that that I could mention these scholars
are secondly housed at the RAND
Corporation where people are lured with
very high salaries and often given half
their time free to do whatever they want
so I have a friend that works at ran
he's a statistician and they make him
work halftime and he gets to play his
own games on their fancy computers the
rest of his time a third group mentioned
it already where academics are housed
and where polls would be put in a little
of his postgraduate time I don't have a
thing about polls be today or anything
was the Brookings Institution they they
the corporate rich not only discussed
there but they also house a great many
academics there these scholars are so
close to the power elite that they
cannot see it they are in many ways
almost part of it they don't have to be
given cut in with big dough they are so
utterly flattered that they are
important
how can a how could there be a power
elite when the Jewish boy like me from
the middle class can be giving advice to
the president United States
[Applause]
now how does all this stuff get into the
government basically what I've told you
and what I can support to the point of
boredom is that the same rather small
group of people sit on certain
foundations run certain corporations go
to the Council on Foreign Relations
interact with run the saint's run of
course they also run the universities
and the best one guy here if I had to
pick the guys Bill Roth who is the one
of the trustees of the regions he's met
a member of the committee for economic
development he runs maths and lines he
sits on foundation he's the guy that
negotiates the Kennedy round and he's
the guy when he comes to Santa Cruz
campus it shows up at the debate and
you've got to get to the left of him not
Reagan if you're ever gonna do anything
because he's pretty cool well the point
is this the way this stuff gets into the
government is through special
commissions and task forces first of all
they set up on a commission on raw
materials they set up a commission on
the budget they set up a commission on
the Alliance for Progress but the key
thing is this who are the men on these
Commission's they are the same men that
have already discussed the question of
the Council on Foreign Relations of the
key things that met in the key
Commission's in the 50s five of the six
guys were from the CFR and the sixth guy
was from the CED the same academics that
have already discussed it in a CFR
discussion group now discuss it and make
it a government report so if a pluralist
wants to study how policy is made all he
has to do is get the reports of the
committee for economic development of
Council on Foreign Relations compare
them with these various commissions
compared with what what the Commission
Rockefeller commissioned the point for
Commission's on compare it with what
they've been saying in CFR for a lot of
years compared the new budgeting system
with what the CED has been pushing
through several different of its
commissions and program for several
years that's how they get into a
government in the end of the government
and you can watch it move paper by paper
the whole country's loaded with mini
graphs handouts read the CFR and CED
stuff and compare it with these reports
that are made to the National Security
Council into various government
department of course they secondly get
into the government because they're the
guys that are appointed to the
government Theodore White and his one of
his making of the presidents tells about
the fact that the list the names of
that were handed to Kennedy for possible
appointments to a State Department
position 60 or 65 or something like that
we're from the Council on Foreign
Relations this is another function of
the Council on Foreign Relations this is
where you learn about how to be a good
government employee this is where the
other cats learn whether the guy's cool
or not this is where I can answer a
Aberle jr. he said oh that's all very
nice mr. Dom Hoff but if they didn't if
they don't wrap elect their own leaders
you can't call them an elite they're
just a collection of individuals you
might as well you might as well say that
the guys that go to the Yale Harvard
football game running the country haha
well the point is that this is where you
learn who's who's got some sense who who
is really cool this is where Averill
Harriman and JJ McCoy and Devereux
josephs come to be seen by the rest of
the guys it's somebody that they want to
trust on policy that's why Jay J McCloy
is on every commission and committee
including the assassination commission
when Jay J McCloy is on and it's a clear
sign to the clowns and hinterland that
it's alright because he has thought
through it even though they haven't or
at least his advisers have told him so
you see JJ's name and you say okay must
be alright we send them a few bucks he's
no it's just incredible because they
obviously couldn't sit on all be there
for all the Commission's that he's on
and the guy that wrote one of the books
on the alliant on the assassination
pointed out that most of the Commission
wasn't there very often well so these
people the point is they're appointed
them to the government the mcbunny these
the Bundys the Kissinger's and so on and
so forth that my friends is a closed
circuit that is the way foreign policies
made the only input into that system is
what the hell is happening overseas very
little input from Americans only when
things really really get heated up and
on that point even a pluralist admit
this and they admit in this country
there is a foreign policy elite never of
course tying this foreign policy lead to
the corporations if you want to read the
latest pathetic example of this you read
a book by Arnold Rhodes called the power
structure which has two grand pages on
foreign policy and managed to say that
foreign policy is made by an elite at
the Council on Foreign Relations which
has nothing to do with the business
community which is out of it and he then
cites the chamber of calm
that's about where most pluralists are
with the business community with the US
Chamber of Commerce and National
Association of Manufacturers and they're
about 40 years out of date which is
about where the US Chamber of Commerce
is when it gets up against these
moderate elements within its own family
even the pluralist admit that public
opinion has virtually no effect on
foreign policy that the foreign policy
elite manipulates public opinion on
foreign policy as much as it is shaped
by it
my sources here are in particular a guy
named Rosen now he has a recent book
that he's edited that suggests this very
nicely well finally a word on why they
do what they do because I know they do
it just read the history of the Council
on Foreign Relations just read shrift
Geysers two books on the committee for
Economic Development just read their
reports and you will know why they do
what they do you will know what concerns
them what bugs them and the first point
is an old one they need markets and
they've known this for a long time only
a few people knew what at first from the
turn of the century but by the late 30s
early 40s there was getting to be a
terribly strong consensus on this and so
from the National Planning Association
on the left to the Brookings Institution
to the committee for Economic
Development to the 20th century fund
which is headed by the multi-millionaire
Burleigh on over to the Council on
Foreign Relations they all understood
that they had to get overseas in the
words of Dean Acheson we either find
some more market so we're gonna have
regimentation here at home we're not
going to be able to produce enough
products and we're gonna have to change
the whole American system but can't be
free and flexible and so on anymore
and this is what you learn in these
particular reports oh you learned
something about raw materials and other
minor aspects of this and I would point
out that if you would read these
histories very carefully and these
organizations very carefully what you
would learn that would be sort of
stunning is that all of this really
happened then long before the dirty Red
Menace really loomed in a in a really
serious fashion in 45 and 46 when the
Cold War supposedly all began and so on
and so forth which then brings up the
whole interesting question of the Daniel
Bell thesis about how all American
foreign policy is this defensive
response to the
Red Menace well in conclusion then what
I'm saying is that why they do this is
that they need what they call overseas
trade i guess that other people have
another word for it and they call it
imperialism thank you let me talk was a
short question you could try to tie up a
little better the thesis at the end of
the need for markets to the kinds of
mechanisms for making foreign policy for
example do you see the academic advisors
in the Council of Foreign Relations and
so on quite conscious of this kind of
need that operates in the power elite do
you see them trying to plan with those
who do seek foreign markets foreign
policies that will further that needs
yeah yes I do and here I should be more
specific and I think this is very
clearly some people and not others and I
think it's I think frankly to be rather
easy to spot them and I think that you
as students and a new leftist in your
attacks and criticism the University and
so on should sharpen in on on a focus on
this because it's really very easy to
pick pick the people out and then work
from it I think I give you an example
from a letter I got from Heilbronn F and
we were exchanging information on this
and I sent him a longer paper on this
same thing and he said now I know many
guys that work at the Council on Foreign
Relations some of them are really more
liberal than this and but they have a
sense of just how far you can sort of
push these guys others these guys sound
his friends sound so conscious that that
they feel well it's the only place where
you can get any leverage on the system
and and maybe if we can just sort of
move them a little bit at a time I mean
this is the way some of them think but
now my friend
that was involved in it he is strictly a
political scientist he's strictly a
student of communism and I don't think
he looks at it in the economic sense but
I will say this in answer to your
question some recent work that I've done
on the corporate how they make domestic
policy which is sort of similar except
public opinion plays a tremendously
greater role in pressuring them that's
where you really see the role of the
economist and that and and and some
really sophisticated economists for
instance Calvin Hoover of Duke was one
of the people had helped these people on
on free trade and the guy that was the
former head of the American economics
Association it's always saying something
at Harvard his name now escapes me
he is always written on the corporation
so it's mild repression he he's always
giving them advices I think those people
are terribly sophisticated about the
needs of the system and the point about
Bill Roth is he's not only trained at
some sophisticated university by these
people but he now can be taught by them
they taught for instance Hoover knows
guys taught him the stabilized budget
concept that how to use the budget and
so on and and and and so they've really
made them a terribly sophisticated sort
of a group this goes all the way back to
the turn of the century with John our
Commons and his friends all of the
political economists at that time the
new economists were involved with
various power lead organizations and
thought they were good guys I just
followed up with one other quick
question don't you think that it's a
little too simple to reduce it all to
this economic interest what about the
increasingly powerful role of the
military with its own interest but are
not simply to be I'm asking this as a
question implying a conclusion we
reduced to their concern for with the
corporations for the corporation's
profits isn't the military in this
various services rival interest an
increasingly critical factor in the
determination of foreign policy well gee
I gotta admit that I don't think so and
I've Franz and I discussed this once and
and the only people I can quote how is
all the people that I badmouth them you
don't like Samuel Huntington and and
Janowicz and so on and so forth
but but my basic point on that very
frankly
from looking at the defense companies
and true they're terribly important but
when you look at who the investment
bankers are and who the people are who
sits on the boards of Lockheed and
Boeing and so on and so forth if you
look at the fact that Ford and General
Motors and all of those people are also
very big defense spenders I can make
absolutely no distinction in my mind
between the power elite the
military-industrial complex that's Ike's
word for the power elite in in my
estimation because I cannot see
different people running these I see
these people oriented into the same sets
of investment houses and so on and so
forth and I still think that in the
American system as it's been through the
whole time I still think the where it's
at is with these corporate leaders I
just do not think it's with these
military people I do think they follow
orders I do think they have their
interests but I don't think like that
the war has a logic razn so on and so
forth
like on all this dropping the bombs
business they turn that off the next day
Oh military maybe can do little
sabotages along the way and so on but I
just don't see those people as
controlling the policy I agree with
Samuel Huntington who's at one of these
Institute's that I just badmouth that is
military is conservative they don't want
to start but they don't want to go to
Vietnam they don't want to start bombing
wants a bomb they don't want to stop
bombing and so on and so forth so I
frankly you know I think that no I think
to go to the military as Mills did in
particular and as some people do now is
to take your eye off off of the ball and
I'm not just saying by that that they
have economic interest sort of in a
beardian way I mean I think that the
power lead has a whole view of
themselves and of the American Way and
the need for free trade and what will
happen to the world of the Communist
kidded I mean I think they have a whole
complex ideology and I'm not ready to
argue that they have some narrow
economic interest necessarily in in
Vietnam but I am ready to argue on
Vietnam is that these decisions were
made in the National Security Council by
people who are from the Council on
Foreign Relations and I always find
every no for instance what annoyed me so
much of the Liberals throughout the
Johnson era was to badmouth Johnson and
he was such a hick and he escalated the
war and his personality and all this
sort of stuff and he has an advisory
group so a month after he de-escalates
there's a little article let's see
on how I decided to deescalate well who
being advised by nine people three of
whom were retired generals the other six
guys who were from Dillon read and
McCloy and this sort of guy and they
told after the Tet Offensive they said
hey man that's it no they had up to then
they've been telling you know prosecute
the war and he changed you know that was
the end so I think that that that is
where it is and when I want to watch for
a change in American policy as I've been
watching on to China policy you watch
what the Council on Foreign Relations is
doing it's just like a bellwether so at
the turn of the sixties after writing
you know their articles in foreign
affairs which is a CFR publication we're
never that there weren't very many on
China and they weren't they were
basically talking military things all of
a sudden around the turn of 1960 the
Ford Foundation gave $900,000 the
Council on Foreign Relations to start
doing China Studies JJ McCloy was then I
think head of both groups which made it
fairly easy both Ford and the CFR made
it a fairly easy exchange and they
started getting all of the China
scholars hopped up and bringing him
there to do these study groups and
writing books and all this sort of thing
pretty soon
Council on Foreign Relations is holding
public opinion surveys in Chicago and
San Francisco and pretty soon you be
Humphrey is saying well I've never said
that our policy remains forever the same
in China and on and on it goes and
they're now trying to moderate you know
they're trying to play little games with
China so I frankly watch those reports
they to me they are the bellwethers it
doesn't it doesn't mean that if CFR says
it that's it because there's also people
in the National Planning Association and
I should say too that there's sort of a
right-wing drag to this group the
National Association of Manufacturers
sort of mentality and they have a heck
of a time with them they have almost as
much trouble with them as they do with
the the radical left as one of their
spokesmen put it he says our problem is
the anarchists on the right by which
they mean the N a.m. in a small business
and the Socialists on the left now this
is a statement from from 1905 or so but
that's been the level of their
sophistication the people who run the
system I think for a very long time
[Applause]
yeah I don't know I don't know geez you
know somebody somebody wrote a story
that the point is that that sort of
thing happens I mean I wouldn't be
surprised this guy was some academic
adviser to one of these groups and has
seen it in action he's seen this sort of
mentality the people and and he's a
little shocked by their morality and and
they're all business point of view and
they're rational calculation of possible
losses and this and that and so on and
so forth
the funnest thing of it is to read the
reviews of it that weird in transaction
and because it really annoyed
certain members of the of the higher
levels the guy from RAND Corporation was
just about flipped out over the book he
thought it was most outrageous to
incredible thing in the whole world
incidentally one of the things you learn
from reading about the Council on
Foreign Relations on is there's only two
things in this country that really scare
these people once the third party and
the others isolationism and the proper
policy new left eye now proposed is to
absolutely adopt ban Smoots position on
on foreign policy JJ mccloy is a
non-american
he's overseas David Rockefeller is a
non-american just like the dan smoot
says and demand total isolationism on
foreign policy that this would recommend
not to try to make a fancy distinction
between American aid overseas and the
and and that other imperialist
organization the Peace Corps insulted
absolute isolationism this is an basic
reason for the strategy is that it
bothers the power leads so much they
really they're just totally afraid right
now this guy is a Brin ski or whatever
his name is that's he's with their
Institute for Russians or whatever it is
at Columbia he's riding the same guff
now that he wrote after the Korean War
net is a danger of withdrawing from
Vietnam is that the American people
might go back into this grand isolation
again and we would never be able to be
international anymore in other words
they're scared to death that a Vietnam
experience will make isolationist out of
Americans they were afraid of that after
the Korean War and their fears were
unfounded of course but they do have
this tremendous dread of isolationism
it's a great solid
Rock of a position that also confuses
the right-wing enormous Li yeah
yeah well sure I mean see at this point
we're talking about a world of things we
don't know about I mean we talked about
the bunch of people that know each other
in a million different places for
instance I happened upon the fact that
that Gates the secretary of defense
before McNamara he knew McNamara knew
McNamara cuz they were fellow trustees
directors of Scott Paper Company I mean
they know each other in a million
different contexts there are
incidentally committees on Foreign
Relations in 30 major cities in this
country and they send speakers out to
the hinterland so there there's a group
in various cities I forget whether San
Francisco has one where they meet and
discuss I mean this is not incidentally
the same stuff as that insipid creature
called the foreign policy Association
and the World Affairs Council which is
just a thinke little organization run by
the same people to get you as
middle-class people involved in
discussing foreign fares very important
to go down in some inane person the
State Department comes and lays it on
you with his fancy stuff and then
somebody gets up and tells you how
wonderful the United Nations is and so
on I mean that's a different
organization is a best of opinion in
influencing organization well but the
point is they know each other in a
million different contexts and I can't
even begin to guess exactly why David
Packard was picked for that job who's
friendly is whose buddy is what exactly
what policy lines he follows and so on
and so forth I mean we got to be careful
on that because they're all chums
they're all chums with everybody else
and from a million different ways yeah
yeah yeah yeah I just don't know that
economic detail and I'd also want to
know who their bank their bankers are
because where this really would often
runs through is through Dylan read and
and houses such as that Lehman Brothers
and so on when the Democrats are in
Lehman Brothers is big and layman
Brothers is in on the financing of many
of these avant-garde space and nuclear
science outfits the Rockefellers do a
lot of financing into these advanced
technology things and so on and so forth
so it gets very tricky the Texas group
is you know financially involved with
some groups and I mean it's sort of like
every group has a sort of an outpost or
friends in New York I think it's very
complicated within the group and I don't
think we should pretend to know that we
know exactly what's going on within the
group and I do in terms of one question
over here I get very uncomfortable and I
get to sort of economic II about it you
know that is you know sometimes it is
obviously some company involved or some
group of companies but I prefer to to
emphasize the fact that they have a that
they have they are the corporate rich
they are the owners and managers and the
large corporations that control the
wealth of this country and make the
major decisions I think some of them
graduate to a systems consciousness they
they advance beyond an interest
consciousness they become systems
conscious a guy like Bundy Bundy's from
a very rich and old family but you can't
tie it with any specific corporation but
you can tie him with the foreign policy
establishment through his father and on
back and run all through all of the
secretaries of states but he has a
certain view and he has a wad of stock
and so on and so forth I don't think
he's grinding any specific company's ax
this is a very tricky thing and it leads
to conflict we often within the power
leave conflicts that are then taken to
be pluralism you know they say hey we
got to control the balance of payments
so what does Henry Ford do the first
thing he does is ship a zillion dollars
overseas to buy out total control of
British Ford well while the masses are
supposed to be paying a duty on any when
they go for in travel and then then they
get mad at him they say Henry Ford you
know he just like you're not Eno know
that you've got it
you know you got a discipline and get
him back in the group I don't know
because I haven't studied the Nixon
group very well and they're definitely a
more you know a more cautious Bunch
within the power elite a much more
conservative element true they have
Kissinger of the Council on Foreign
Relations in Rockefeller right-hand-man
in the administration true they have
Clifford Harden who's not generally
identified as a Rockefeller Foundation
trustee and on down the line but they
also have for their second-in-command
that one of these Neanderthals from the
Hoover Institute and and so on and so
forth so they have a much more cautious
group that the democratic elements
within the power elite don't have any
any allegiance to so I just can't guess
although I must say that my basic point
would be that there's a consensus that
developed in the Council on Foreign
Relations group that they're not going
to go too far beyond an upper class
journalist Joseph Kraft who wrote about
the Council on Foreign Relations he's
also a member he made the point he says
the Council on Foreign Relations
provides a nice bridge when there's a
changing of the guard in Washington
there's not that much difference in
foreign policy even though gala brave
goes around and gives speeches about the
three stages in American foreign policy
since since World War two it's the most
incredible speech ever heard you got
dramatic differences you know about like
every five years at flip-flop it's not
only not true but the same guys are
running it they don't even die they
don't even die they start out with her
16 they're now all 80 in the same guys
running it true they've moderated a
little late they change with the winds
things happen you know China and Russia
you know have their differences Cuba
happens you know and they react to this
but basically they are pretty pragmatic
sorts of guys pretty pragmatic so I get
I go to a meeting and a Marxist stands
up and you can't stand it he said the
policy United States American is
genocide in Vietnam and genocide Nikaido
and this was two years ago I said I'm
sorry I've read that I've read the
Council on Foreign Relations port I
don't think their policy to genocide
neither place their policy is
carrot-and-stick which is always their
policy they run up the big guns
they always dangle a dam you know in
Vietnam they dangle a few dams and the
ghetto they dangle it's their policy
they're gonna be out there co-opting
they're gonna fire their foundations in
there and so on I said I don't think
there's gonna be a long hot summer and I
think that they'll get out of Vietnam
and I incidentally I still think they'll
get out of Vietnam and I think Hades
last points we're right but the Vietnam
are giving us the cover to get
all we need is time to let the American
people get cooled off about it so it's
not seen as a disastrous defeat they
will let some sort of a government get
set up and they just hope it doesn't
collapse into communist hands for five
years until it's out of our hands that's
my view of it I might be wrong but I am
willing to make that guess on the basis
of reading their stuff they are damn
proud of the fact of what happened in
Indonesia when Johnson abdicated that's
what he said he said we've you know
Indonesia fifth largest country in the
world they've got their bases in
Thailand they've got their Indonesia
back and they feel like god Vietnam
encircled Plus scallop Pinot has told
him a hundred times it must be through
their head that North Vietnam Vietnam
was a fairly unique thing in terms of
long history of fighting imperialists
you know whether they're Chinese or
whatever I think you know I think
they'll finally believe old scaloppine
oh no they don't they don't have a
falling dominoes view anymore
they've solidified their position in in
Southeast Asia so I think they'll back
off a little bit I really do I think
they're that's their problems do they
don't act like that the Marxist tell us
they should they don't come up tight and
let us polarize in all those other words
they keep absorbing you and hugging you
and espousing you and and you know true
they spy on Ralph Nader and then they
appoint him to a commission on
transportation and so on you've got to
get right up next to him just said you
gotta get right right up next to him
that's a whole tricky scene and I get
all a leftist mad at me when I give
house I've never been hit over the head
so I don't like to put my opinions forth
on that
[Applause]
you